---
title: v2.3
date: 2021-04-04
tags:
    - releases
---
## [v2.3](https://github.com/saulpw/visidata/releases/tag/v2.3) (2021-04-04)

This release adds a memory sheet and improves on several other features.  Major changes are listed below.   Please see the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/saulpw/visidata/blob/stable/CHANGELOG.md#v2.3) for the full list of changes.

1. Memory sheet, for recording values usable in expressions.  View the memory sheet with `open-memory` (`Alt+Shift+M`), add current cell with `Alt+M`, add single aggregated value with `z+`.  Also reference the current clipboard value as `clipval`.  #912

2. The split pane feature has been revamped.  Now there is one sheet stack per pane, and sheets do not jump between panes.  New sheets open in the current pane.  Send the current sheet to the other pane with `Shift+Z` (same command as invoking splitpane in the first place).  `Ctrl+^` swaps sheets in the current pane.  See the `pane` column on the Sheets Sheet (pane 0 means "not on any sheet stack", i.e. it's been quit). #894

3. Colors now may have a background color in addition to the fg color and attributes.  Add e.g. "**on blue**" or "**on 214**" to a color to set the background color.  There is still the (curses) limit of 256 active colors shown at one time. (This is one of several changes in 2.3 necessary to use the new `darkdraw` plugin.) #435

4. minor additions

- new command: `jump-first` (bound to `g Ctrl+^`) to push the bottom sheet (used repeatedly will cycle through sheets in the current pane).
- `Ctrl+X` within `Ctrl+X` (`pyobj-expr`) drops into a Python REPL.

5. changes to options and commands

- `options.use_default_colors` now defaults to `True` (was `False`).
- `delete` commands no longer move deleted values to clipboard #895
- `zd` and `gzd` (`delete-cells`) set the value to `options.null_value` instead of always using `None`.
