# [v2.1](https://github.com/saulpw/visidata/releases/tag/v2.1) (2020-12-06)

This release fixes several bugs in 2.0 and fills in some of the gaps.
Please see the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/saulpw/visidata/blob/stable/CHANGELOG.md#v2.1) for the complete list of changes and bugfixes.

1. `options.some_selected_rows`

Some commands, like `setcol-expr` (`g=`) operate on the selected rows.
Before 2.0, if no rows were selected, these commands would fall back to operating over all rows.
This is intuitive and helpful, but can cause problems with non-interactive script replay:  sometimes there are legitimately no selected rows, and so the command should not do anything (but also not fail).
So the behavior was changed in 2.0 to have reliable and deterministic results.
It's reasonably easy to work around: select all rows with `gs`, repeat the command, and maybe unselect them all with `gu`.
But this turned out to be ultimately disappointing for interactive use.

So, in 2.1, there is now an option `some_selected_rows`, which if True, causes these commands to operate on all rows, if none are selected:

    `setcol-expr` (`g=`)
    `setcol-iter` (`gz=`)
    `setcol-subst` (`g*`)
    `setcol-subst-all` (`gz*`)

This option applies only to interactive mode, and not to batch mode.
In batch mode, commands that operate on selected rows will always use the list of selected rows, even if there are none (and so it won't do anything).
Be careful about saving .vd scripts from sessions in which this option was set; the results when replaying in batch mode may not be as expected.

2. `options.numeric_binning`

For 2.0, ranged binning of numeric columns was implemented, and allowed to be disabled by setting `options.numeric_binning` to False.
(By default it was set to True.)

In 2.1, this option is now disabled by default, and must be enabled (whether globally or per-sheet) by setting it to True.

3. [input] Shift+Arrow within `edit-cell` to move cursor and re-enter edit mode

By popular demand, pressing Shift+Arrow when editing a cell, will save the current value, move the cursor one row or column in the given direction, and re-enter edit mode.
This makes it easier to enter data, either row-wise or column-wise.

This feature obsoletes `options.cmd_after_edit`, which was always a terrible hack.  It has no effect now.

4. Expression can access column attributes

In 2.0, expressions could use attributes on the `vd` singleton or the current `sheet` object, and had `sheet` and `row` special variables to refer to the sheet and row objects themselves.

In 2.1, expressions can also use attributes of the expression column, and `col` can be used to refer to the column object directly.
(So `col.width` and `width` both refer to the width of the expression column itself, if there are no columns named `width`.)

5. Differentiate `select-equal-` and `select-exact-`.

Previously,  `select-equal-` (bound to `,`) matched on the **typed value**.
Now, `select-equal-` matches on the **displayed value**.
New commands `select-exact-cell`/`-row` that match on **typed value** are bound to `z,` and `gz,` (the display value may be rounded or formatted with less precision, so using the 
typed value is "more precise".

(Thanks @geekscrapy for noticing)

6. New macro system

A new command `macro-record` (bound to `m`) starts recording commands for use in a macro.
The same command stops recording and prompts for a keystroke to bind the macro to.
When the given keystroke is pressed, the macro will be executed.
All macros run their commands on the current (row, column, sheet), regardless of the cursor position when the macro was recorded.

The new command `macro-sheet` (bound to `gm`) opens an index of all current macros.  A macro on this sheet can be viewed with `Enter` and then modified, saving changes with `Ctrl+S`

This feature obsoletes the older iteration of macro system, and removes the deprecated `z Ctrl+D` command.

(Thanks @bob-u for the suggestion)

7. Other Additions and Improvements

- Add `mode` and `stdev` aggregators.
- Add sort-order indicator in column header.
- Unset options with `d` on options sheet (also add `options.unset()` API function).
- `.vdj` scripts are now hashbangable.  Put `#!vd -p` at the start of the .vdj file and watch it go!  (Note: extension must still be .vdj for now.)
- The `floatsi` type (`z%`) can now parse SI strings like "2.3M" (thanks @anjakefala for sponsoring).
- Regex capture (`;`) will use capture names as column names, if available (thanks @tsibley).

8. Format-specific improvements

- [http] auto-paginate by continuing with the given `links.next.url` from the response.
- [json] 50% speedup for loading (thanks @lxcode).
- [pdf] `options.pdf_tables` to parse tables from pdf with `tabular`.
- [sqlite] Use internal rowid to update and delete rows (`WITHOUT ROWID` sqlite tables can no longer be modified).
- [zip] Add `extract-file`, `extract-selected`, `extract-file-to`, `extract-selected-to` commands (bound to `x`, `gx`, `zx`, and `gzx` on the ZipSheet).

- [fixed] Add fixed-width saver (uses col.width).
- [clickhouse] Add plugin for [clickhouse](clickhouse.tech) loader.
