# [v1.5.1](https://github.com/saulpw/visidata/releases/tag/v1.5.1) (2018-12-17)

# v1.5.1: Bugfixes and user feedback

The initial motivation for this patch was to fix an idle performance regression. In the interim, though, we have received a bunch of feedback for improvements and a couple of feature requests.

So thanks for all of your ongoing engagement and for continuing to share VisiData with the world. We hope you enjoy this final release of 2018!

A brief overview:

1. Improvements to the pandas loader.
    - thanks to @nickray for the bughunting

2. When set to True `options.bulk_select_clear` bulk select commands (`|`, `g|`, `,`, etc) will clear the previously selected rows.
    - the default is set to False and exhibits the current behaviour of retaining the already selected rows
    - thanks to @aborruso for the suggestion

3. `Shift+O` once again pushes the global options sheet. You can find the sheet options by pressing `zO`. `gO` now opens the `.visidatarc` which can be edited and saved from within the VisiData interface.

4. Sorting is now asynchronous, per user request. Please let us know how you find it.
    - thanks to @apnewberry for starting that conversation

5. `gz^` now renames all visible columns to contents of selected rows and `gz*` substitutes over all visible columns
    - thanks, once again, to @aborruso for both suggestions

As usual, the complete list of changes can be found in the [Changelog](https://github.com/saulpw/visidata/blob/stable/CHANGELOG.md#v151-2018-12-17).
